# Lab Report: Lab 8: Multisensory Reading

#### Kaitlin Kerr

## Process Description

In this lab, we interacted with replicas of different historical assistive reading technologies. The replicas were 3D created using a process where the book objects were scanned into a computer program, then doubled in size, then printed in two separate blocks. Instead of using sight to examine the texts, we obscured them to only utilize our sense of touch. Feeling each object for the first time, it was nearly impossible for the untrained finger to determine what was printed on the blocks. 

## Observations

When trying to read the texts, I was surprised by how difficult it was to determine which reading action would best suit each text. Was the reader meant to move their finger from left to right without picking it up off the page? Or was the reader meant to feel each letter from top to bottom and then advance onto the next letter? Was the reader meant to use their dominant or non-dominant hand? As a sighted person with no training in this type of reading, the actions associated with this type of reading were completely foreign to me. However, I was able to pick up on a few different reading actions. For example, some of the texts had symbols at the end of each line (similar in shape to brackets) that lead the reader onto the next line. Instead of having to count down how many lines you’ve read, you can simply use the bracket to guide your finger along to the next line. There is no need for this reading action in books designed for sighted people, but the design of books for non-sighted people as well as the actions associated with those books must be adapted. 

Additionally, when reading the texts, it was nearly impossible for me to tell what was an illustration, and what was text. Admittedly, this was greatly due to my personal unfamiliarity with these reading systems. When reading the eclipse and snowflake diagrams, I was completely unable to discern what information this image was trying to convey. The designer of the Touch This Page Projected wanted to share the story of one non-sighted person’s reading experience – similarly, he was unable to discern any meaning from line drawings. He complained that these representations had no meaning to those who had never experienced the object visually. Because I had never experienced these images as anything other than visual, I could not discern any meaning experiencing a non-visual representation. 

## Analysis

When participating in this lab, I formed a mental distinction between the reading actions of a sighted and non-sighted person. It seemed like the physical differences in readers created separate ways to read. At first observation, this idea seemed rational. The different abilities of each person lent themselves to a different type of reading action. However, upon further analysis, I found this observation striking. The intention of the Boston Line Type was to create a system that could be read by *both* blind and sighted people. This system was supposed to create a common ground between sighted and non-sighted people, removing barriers that the Braille system put in place. While Braille could only be deciphered by the trained finger, Howe’s system was meant to be universal. 

As 99% Invisible, “The Universal Page” describes it,

>“[Howe] didn’t want blind people to use a system — like braille — that was separate from what sighted people used. He thought it would isolate blind people and prevent them from integrating into the wider world. Long before the concept of “universal design” had been articulated, it was informing Howe’s thinking about how to design for people with disabilities.”

The “reading action” didn’t matter to Howe as long as it didn’t inhibit non-sighted people from integrating into the world. If any literate person picked up a book, and was able to read it, regardless of ability, then Howe would be satisfied. He was advocating for universalism. 

He most likely would’ve agreed with Sara Hendren’s sentiment that, “any us/them distinction between able-minded/able-bodied and disabled is a false divide.” Simply because one person felt a text to glean meaning, and the other scanned it with their eyes, doesn’t mean the same meaning wasn’t conveyed. Any distinctions that separated the two groups were unnecessary and arbitrary. An important idea when considering the *social* implications of two divided reading systems, but what if above all we consider practicality?  

The invention of Boston Line Type was a key moment in this history of accessibility, and it changed the way people thought about universal design. However, the blind students of the 1860s, during the heat of the Braille vs Line Type debate, were usually strong advocates for Braille over Line Type. (99% Invisible) Although universality is important to think about, in my opinion, when we’re expanding universality to the non-disabled then it becomes a hinderance to positive progress. Because systems like Braille can’t be read by *looking at the dots* the same way Line Type can, this new system is almost an expansion of access to sighted people. Because having a system uniquely tailored to the blind makes the sighted uncomfortable, a *universality* over *functionality* becomes the priority. Instead of making a universal system, Line Type expanded upon a system that was already well-suited for the blind. Simply because it is a system non-universal system, doesn’t inherently make it a hinderance to progress. It is okay if it’s not universal, as long as the system increases access. 
