# Lab Report: Programming Literature

#### Kaitlin Kerr

## Process Description
In our second lab of the year, we created Twitter bots that tweet out replacement style poetry. To “write” our bots, we needed to format a sentence (called the “origin”) and then write out lists of words that could replace certain phrases in the sentence to generate new meaning. Because I had never worked with JSON before, I wanted to start off with a simpler bot before working myself up to a larger and more complex one. My first origin was a simple simile: Like #noun1# being #past-verb# against a #noun2#.

 For both of my bots, I was inspired by the song “Wild Sage” by The Mountain Goats. This simile follows the format of one the lyric: “Like marbled being thrown against a mirror.” For each symbol, I only wrote out five different phrases to be substituted through Tracery. I got some interesting combinations, for example: 

> Like blood being thrown against a sky

> Like spirts being scraped against a meadow
 
> Like skin being grown against a angel 

I thought the process was really interesting, but I wasn’t entirely satisfied with the results. For example, I didn’t know how I would go about changing the origin to display “an” instead of “a” when “noun 2” started with a vowel. This practice bot made me realize that in order to create something a bit more intriguing, I would need to be more thoughtful in my choice of origin and replacement values to make up for my lack of coding knowledge. 

For my second bot, I chose to remix the lyric: “Like wild sage growing in the weeds.” To make this a more complex bot, chose to incorporate Darius Kazemi’s flowers corpora. Each symbol had at least ten different substitutions, which created a greater variety of combinations. For example: 

> Like brave blossoms growing in the desert 

> Like drunk carnations growing in the marshes 

> Like cynical heather growing in the field 

We then concluded the lab by pasting the JSON code to “Cheap Bots, Done Quick,” which linked our work to a twitter account for posting. 

## Observations
I was much more satisfied with my second bot, not only because there was a greater variety of combinations, but because the combinations came out more readable than the first bot. When I was just practicing, I assembled a very random list of nouns and past verbs. The resulting effect was rather choppy, as if someone had used the “find and replace” function on their word processor. When compiling my list for my final bot, I was much more mindful to the words I was choosing to replace. I found that adjectives and nouns lend themselves to this type of replacement grammar more than verbs do. 

I was surprised by the cohesiveness of the content that my bot was generating. Because it was not very advanced, I expected my bot to sound like “Mad Libs” – sometimes it works, sometimes it is a little nonsensical. The cohesivity of the content relied on the relatively abstract nature of the origin. Attributing adjectives like “brave,” “drunk,” and “cynical,” to flowers sounds poetic, even though it is random. The tweets generated by my bot can pass as poetry because the sentence doesn’t change drastically with the incorporation of a new plant or location. The reader experiences a very similar image with each new tweet.  

## Analysis
Who wrote these tweets? Well, the code decided which *adjectives* would be paired with which *plants* would be paired with which *locations.* But I, the coder, decided which adjectives, plants, and locations to include in my code. I wrote the code that wrote the content, so to a certain extent, I am the human creator of this content. When we use non-human elements to create art, it begs the question, *who created this content*? And if it wasn’t a human, *can we still consider it art?* 

In Ælfric’s preface to his translation of Genesis, he notes, “the work [of translation] is very dangerous to me or anyone to undertake,” for “foolish” people might misunderstand the text and live their lives in ways unapproved of by God. If we consider my code to be a form of translation (i.e. a translation from English to JSON), then do the same concerns still apply? In what ways can this text be misinterpreted? If one does not label their content as in-part created by code, then what does that mean to the human reader? Let’s assume a human reader was to stumble upon my twitter account, not knowing it was in-part created by a bot. The most likely outcome would be they dismiss me as a bad poet. (Word replacement just isn’t Shakespeare.) But what if it was decided that this “poetry” was deserving of the Nobel Prize in Literature. When we create text in this way, we must decide if this text has any artistic merit. Does half-human, half-code work have the same value as work crafted entirely by humans?

If we make a distinction in the value of a work based on the closeness to the human hand, where does one draw the line? A pencil is technology. A paintbrush is technology. Clay is technology. If we agree that using these mediums don’t abstract the human from the art, then why should translation into code? 

This changing link between human creators and non-human entities is not a new one. As Amaranth Borsuk writes in *The Book,* 

> “Philosopher and theorist Walter Benjamin’s seminal essay ‘The Work of Art in the Age of its Mechanical Reproducibility’ (1935) suggests that the photography, miniaturization, and distribution of images in the late nineteenth century destroyed the ‘aura’ of art by abstracting it from the hand of the person who created it” (76).

In the case of the Twitter bot, “abstraction” occurs once I run my code. Once I send it off into the world, my hands don’t become associated with the content anymore. I am not physically pressing the “tweet” button, my mind isn’t re-arranging the words, my hands don’t type out the text. When interacting with a codex, it is easier to view it as a work of art with a human creator. With a codex, there is a human name on the cover. Readers know although the words on the page we *hold* were not written by a human, at one-point a *person* decided which words to use where. But with these tweets, there is no “aura of art.” Benjamin might argue this lack of artistic aura stems from the distribution method. Unlike a piece of fine art, a single copy of my tweet doesn’t have any monetary value. I’m giving it away for free, anyone can “own” it by simply re-tweeting it. But that’s not the only reason the phrases cranked out by my bot don’t feel like art. 

Word replacement technology incorporates non-human decisions into the creation of art. When one uses pencils, paintbrushes, or clay, although it incorporates a technological tool, the decision maker is always the human creator. Hands hold the pencil, hands dip the paintbrush into paint, hands sculpt the clay – there are physical connections to the technology and the end result. There is not the same level of “abstraction” that occurs when non-sentient entities make decisions, such as with a Twitter bot making poetry. 
