# Lab Report: Zine You Around

#### Kaitlin Kerr

## Process Description

In our zine lab, Northeastern’s Archivist Molly brought in a pile of old magazines for us to turn into our very own mini eight-page zines. She helped us construct our zines by leading us through a demonstration of how to properly fold and cut an 8.5x11 piece of printer paper into a little booklet. A few of the steps were a little tricky, but with some help from my peers we were able to figure it all out together. After our basic outline was created, we were set loose to create. I crafted my zine by selecting random images (and perfume samples) from the assorted magazines that interested me, and then complied them into my little booklet. I didn’t seem to have any sort of theme – I just went along creating without a rhyme or reason. Once I’d pasted all of the images into the zine, I thought I’d tie it together with some quoted lyrics. Although it isn’t much, I’m quite fond of my mini zine.  

## Observations
Although we weren’t planning on going around the table and sharing what we created, I thought this was one of the most interesting parts of the lab. I was really interested in hearing the different processes people used, and how it affected their final product. A surprising amount of people had the same process as me – just compiling images that spoke to them and then worrying about how they all fit together later. This may have been a result of the context of their creation. We didn’t really know what materials were going to be available during our zine lab, so we couldn’t have planned out its content in advance. We also knew these were going to be single copy artifacts, so there wasn’t the great pressure of distribution to create something comprehensive. We were just creating to have fun. 

I was really surprised by how much everyone enjoyed this activity. I knew *I* would enjoy it – all throughout high-school I kept up with a very elaborate “art-journal.” In fact, the two mediums are very similar. They’re pieces of art created by collecting clippings and compiling them into something new. The process of creating both artifacts is very similar, and the end results have similar aesthetics. As mediums, both have the potential to be about any subject, and are only limited by the size and shape of the page. The major difference between the two are the modes of reproduction. While typically the end-goal for a zine is to xerox copy the original artifact for “mass” distribution, art journals may be shared in “flip through” videos online, but typically don’t have a method of physical distribution. 

## Analysis
While creating our mini zines, I was really curious about the nature of copyright concerning these artifacts. My curiosity was prompted when a classmate clipped out a poem I’d submitted to the literary magazine, and was considering pasting it into her zine. Although she didn’t end up using it in her zine, I began to think about how would go about crediting all of the art in their zines to their creators. My own zine features a model from a Gucci advertisement, a renaissance painting, and a New Yorker cartoon. I didn’t attribute any credit to the Gucci model or photographer, I don’t even know the title of the painting, and aside from the little signature in the bottom of the cartoon, the work is uncredited. Because we were just creating to learn more about zines as a medium (and to have a little bit of creative fun), it doesn’t really matter if we include some stolen art, but it made me wonder about the ethics of creating a zine this way. 

The contents of zines like Pagan Kennedy’s “Pagan’s Head” were mostly original. She drew a lot of her own cartoons and wrote her own “articles.” When the content was not original, it was usually created by a close friend who was credited. Still, it features some clipart, some magazine clippings, and some photographs, where the creator is not credited. We could argue that the clipart is public domain, and the clippings were within fair use because they were modified. But I have a hard time with the lack of attribution of the photographs. I’m sure the photos Kennedy didn’t take herself were just taken by her friends, but still, she lived in a colony of budding artists. They deserve to be credited for their work to make a name for themselves among her readers. The selections we read for class from ‘Zine (1995) didn’t describe any artistic disputes for credit, so perhaps it wasn’t even a part of the conversation. 

In the “Zine Librarians Code of Ethics Zine,” copyright concerns generally focus on ensuring the creator of the zine is credited with their creation. It doesn’t touch on how the contents of the zine should be credited, which leads me to believe that at the height of the zine’s popularity, there wasn’t a debate about proper attribution of credit. The people making zines weren’t getting rich off of them, so if they stole content, there was no money being taken away from the original creators. 

Putting these ideas into today’s context, it makes me think about people who create original art and then upload it to platforms like Instagram. People have free access to their art, so they rely on sales from their online stores or sponsored ad posts to generate revenue. If a third party were to steal their art, and repost it without credit, then it’s very possible they’re taking away potential views, clicks, and/or purchases from the original creator. 

