# Lab Report: Lab 5: Illuminating the Text

#### Kaitlin Kerr

## Process Description
When we walked into the classroom, every seat was illuminated by candlelight. To learn how difficult the life of a scribe was, we transcribed handwritten letters. I was tasked with copying a letter written by Edgar Allen Poe in 1848. Reading the letter in full light is slow going, so reading it with the added obstacle of dim candlelight is a challenge. The candlelight becomes especially challenging when anyone in the room moves, or lets out a sigh. The shifting air made the flames flicker, casting shadows across the page. This movement of the already limited light slowed down the already sluggish transcription process. 

After the first activity, we blew out the candles, turned on the light, and examined copies of a geography textbook. The class was divided up into pairs, and together each pair worked with a different edition of the same textbook. Through conversations with my partner, Lily, we realized that although the book was intending to teach geography, there were no maps! Instead of a visual representation of the shape and locations of different states, there were paragraphs upon paragraphs of written explanation. For example, in place of showing a picture of what Connecticut looks like, the textbook would describe it as *a state directly South of Massachusetts, West of Rhode Island, North of the Long Island Sound, and East of New York.* It was quite odd to try to imagine what a state looked like from just these descriptions. I’m not sure if I only heard these descriptions, I’d be able to identify the state at all. 

## Observations
Although we spent 20 minutes transcribing, I only got about a quarter of the way through Poe’s letter. While Poe’s script is beautiful, it is rather small. There are 36 lines of text on the first page (including the date line, 37.) To put that in perspective, a typical 12pt font double spaced essay fits about 22 lines of text on a page. An average college ruled piece of lined notebook paper only has 32 lines on it. That means Poe was writing with ruling narrower than college ruled by sight alone – there are no margins or lines on the page. It is astonishing how he managed to write in perfectly straight lines. By comparison, my transcription looks like it was written on a boat on a stormy day. This formatting was most likely adopted because Poe was trying to use every single square inch of the paper. When I was transcribing, I wasn’t worried about using all of the paper, so I left space all around the edges of the page as well as in between the lines. While I got my piece of paper for free, Poe likely paid enough for his paper to be wary of wasting it. 

The second activity made me think about the way printing technology shaped the way people learned. I never considered a world where creating a map would be *too* high tech or expensive. If I wanted to incorporate a map into this lab report, I’d simply take a screenshot of Google Maps. If a printer needed to incorporate a map into one of their works, they’d need to commission custom wood cuts to be made in an entirely different facility. (Then again, it is not like my word processor has the ability to create images, I’d have to pull them from another service, like Google).   

## Analysis

In the poem, “A Roll of the Dice,” Stéphane Mallarmé’s uses white space to create literary meaning. His poem cannot be read the same way without Mallarmé’s thoughtful formatting. By applying this logic of “reading” white space to historical pieces, like Poe’s letter, we can glean a different kind of meaning. We cannot exclusively look at the text of Poe’s letter, just as we cannot only look at the text of Mallarmé’s poem. By combining a reading of both text and white space, we can learn more about Poe. From his level handwriting to his beautiful script to his frugal use of page space – scholars shouldn’t ignore the physical formatting aspect of the work. 

Although the geography book we looked at in-class is an impressive feat of bookmaking technology, it lacked visual maps. Even in printing’s early days, there was a conversation about the codex’s limitations. These frustrations with moveable type manifested in the form of artist’s books. Even early on, people were challenging what the word “book” meant, and what protocols and procedures went into creating a book. William Blake, for example, completely altered the printing process. Instead of using moveable type, Blake used a relief-etching technique (Viscomi). Instead of typed words, where each letter looks the same, each page is filled with beautiful script. The text resembles handwriting more than type. Additionally, each page was hand colored by either William Blake or his wife Catherine Blake. With this method, the Blakes were able to keep the artist’s touch preserved in the final product. By altering the printing process, they changed the way the book conveyed meaning (Borsuk). Instead of a work made entirely of text, similar to the geography textbook, the Blake’s work creates meaning unconventionally. (Or, at least unconventionally for the time). In this way, they overcame the limitations of printing to create their own artist book. 
