# Reading Prep: Assemblage 

#### Kaitlin Kerr

## Questions or Observations

1. In their “Code of Ethics,” Zine Librarians state that their overarching goal is to “facilitate the recognition of zines as legitimate cultural artifacts” (9). At first, it seemed so bizarre to me that these wouldn’t be considered important in the historical canon. They’re artistic works, filled with poetry, photographs, and literature. But upon further consideration, it makes sense that zines would be rejected from the literary canon. They document the lives of *everyday* people. They’re *self* published and *un*edited. (Zines often also focus on content lacking in the establishment, like women’s studies). Everything that makes them distinct as cultural artifacts rejects the literary canon. Therefore, it makes sense that to facilitate their recognition, that librarians are using the structures of the establishment (ie. archives and libraries) to bring them into the cultural conversation. 

2. In “The Book as Interface,” Borsuk describes different works that have used the affordances of the e-book to create new meaning within their work. Borsuk lists Samantha Gorman and Danny Cannizaro’s *Pry* as well as Erik Loyer’s *Strange Rain*. (If zines are having difficulty becoming cultural artifacts, I can’t imagine where these fit). The description of these interactive book games reminded me of the app “Lifeline” by 3 Minute Games. In this simple text-based story game, players must save an astronaut who’s crash landed on a far-away moon by choosing between two different responses. The story plays out in real time, with notifications on your device’s screen from the stranded astronaut calling out for help making a decision. It is a simple format, but it takes advantage of the medium to create new meaning. People are unlikely to sit down for 2-3 hours to play a choose your own adventure game, so this app gives players 5-10 minutes of story at a time. Slowly feeding the players/readers, the game is almost like a serial “chapter play” where the story unfurls throughout time. 

3. In “6 Styles of Erasure Poetry,” Erin Dorney describes different methods by which poets can create their own poetry from existing blocks of text. Each of the methods seems to fall into two categories – either addition or subtraction. With methods like “cross out,” the poet *adds* black marker to a text to create new meaning. And with methods like “computer” or “cut out” the poet *subtracts* text to leave a poem behind. How do these different methods create different meaning? In other words, what’s lost, and what’s gained? 
